 THE RIME OF THE ANCIENT MARINER Parts I-IV of VII by Samuel Taylor Coleridge
 COFFEE BREAK COLLECTION XXV WATER
 This is a LibriVox recording. All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain. For more
 information or to volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
 This recording by Michelle Frye, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, in November two thousand nineteen.
 THE RIME OF THE ANCIENT MARINER Part I
 It is an ancient mariner, And he stoppeth one of three
 By thy long grey beard and glittering eye. Now wherefore stoppest thou me?
 The bridegroom's doors are opened wide, And I am next of kin.
 The guests are met, the feast is set, May'st hear the merry din.
 He holds him with his skinny hand, There was a ship, quoth he.
 Hold off, unhand me, grey-beard loon! Eft soons his hand dropped he.
 He holds me with his glittering eye. The wedding guest stood still,
 And listens like a three years' child. The mariner hath his will.
 The wedding guest sat on a stone, He cannot choose but hear,
 And thus spake on that ancient man, The bright-eyed mariner.
 The ship was cheered, the harbor cleared, Merrily did we drop.
 Below the kirk, below the hill, Below the lighthouse top.
 The sun came up upon the left, Out of the sea came he,
 And he shone bright, and on the right Went down into the sea.
 Higher and higher every day, Till over the mast at noon.
 The wedding guest here beat his breast, For he heard the loud bassoon.
 The bride hath paced into the hall, Red as a rose is she,
 Nodding their heads before her goes The merry minstrely.
 The wedding guest he beat his breast, Yet he cannot choose but hear,
 And thus spake on that ancient man, The bright-eyed mariner.
 And now the storm-blast came, And he was tyrannous and strong,
 He struck with his oar taking wings, And chased south along.
 With sloping masts and dipping prow, As who pursued with yell and blow,
 Still treads the shadow of his foe, And forward bends his head.
 The ship drove fast, loud roared the blast, And southward aye we fled.
 And now there came both mist and snow, And it grew wondrous cold,
 And ice-mast high came floating by, As green as emerald.
 And through the drifts and snowy cliffs Did send a dismal sheen,
 Nor shapes of men nor beasts we ken, The ice was all between.
 The ice was here, the ice was there, The ice was all around,
 It cracked and growled and roared and howled, Like noises in a swound.
 At length did cross an albatross, Through the fog it came,
 As if it had been a Christian soul, We hailed it in God's name.
 It ate the food it ne'er had eat, And round and round it flew,
 The ice did split with the thunder fit, The helmsman steered us through.
 And a good south wind sprung up behind, And the albatross did follow,
 And every day, for food or play, Came to the mariner's hollow.
 In mist or cloud, on mast or shroud, It perched for vespers nine,
 Whilst all the night, through fog, smoke, white,
 Glimmered the white moonshine.
 God save the ancient mariner, From the fiends that plague thee thus,
 Why looks thou so?
 With my crossbow, I shot the albatross.
 Part the second.
 The sun now rose upon the right, Out of the sea came he,
 Still hid in mist, and on the left, Went down into the sea.
 And a good south wind still blew behind, But no sweet bird did follow,
 Nor any day, for food or play, Came to the mariner's hollow.
 And I had done an hellish thing, And it would work him woe,
 For all avert, I had killed the bird, That made the breeze to blow.
 Ah, wretch, said they, the bird to slay, That made the breeze to blow.
 Nor dim, nor red, like God's own head, The glorious sun upwrist.
 Then all avert, I had killed the bird, That brought the fog and mist.
 T'was right, said they, such birds to slay, That bring the fog and mist.
 The fair breeze blew, the white foam flew, The furrow followed free.
 We were the first that ever burst Into that silent sea.
 Down dropped the breeze, the sails dropped down,
 T'was sad as sad could be,
 And we did speak only to break The silence of the sea.
 All in a hottened copper sky, The bloody sun at noon,
 Right up above the mast did stand, No bigger than the moon.
 Day after day, day after day, We stuck, nor breath, nor motion,
 As idle as a painted ship Upon a painted ocean.
 Water, water everywhere, And all the boards did shrink.
 Water, water everywhere, Nor any drop to drink.
 The very deep did rot, O Christ, that ever this should be.
 Yea, slimy things did crawl With legs upon the slimy sea.
 About, about, in reel and rout, The death-fires danced at night.
 The water, like a witch's oils, Burnt green and blue and white,
 And some in dreams assured were Of the spirit that plagued us so.
 Nine fathom deep he had followed us From the land of mist and snow,
 And every tongue, through utter drought, Was withered at the root.
 We could not speak, no more than if We had been choked with soot.
 Ah, well, a day, what evil looks Had I from old and young.
 Instead of the cross, the albatross About my neck was hung.
 Part the third.
 There passed a weary time, Each throat was parched and glazed each eye.
 A weary time, a weary time, How glazed each weary eye,
 When, looking westward, I beheld A something in the sky.
 At first it seemed a little speck, And then it seemed a mist.
 It moved and moved and took at last A certain shape, I whizzed.
 A speck, a mist, a shape, I whizzed.
 And still it neared and neared, As if it dodged a water sprite.
 It plunged and tacked and veered.
 With throats unslaked, with black lips baked, We could not laugh, nor wail.
 Through utter drought, all dumb, we stood.
 I bit my arm, I sucked the blood, And cried, assail, assail.
 With throats unslaked, with black lips baked, A gape, they heard me call.
 Gramercy, they for joy did grin, And all at once their breath drew in,
 As they were drinking all.
 See, see, I cried, she tacks no more, Hither to work us will.
 Without a breeze, without a tide, She steadies with upright keel.
 The western wave was all aflame, The day was well nigh done.
 Almost upon the western wave Rested the broad bright sun,
 When that strange shape drove suddenly Betwixt us and the sun.
 And straight the sun was flecked with bars, Heaven's mother send us grace,
 As if through a dungeon great he peered With broad and burning face.
 Alas, thought I, and my heart beat loud, How fast she nears and nears.
 Are those her sails that glance in the sun Like restless gossameres?
 Are those her ribs through which the sun Did peer as through a grate?
 And is that woman all her crew?
 Is that a death, and are there two?
 Is death that woman's mate?
 Her lips were red, her looks were free, Her locks were yellow as gold,
 Her skin was as white as leprosy, The nightmare life in death was she,
 Who thicks man's blood with cold.
 The naked hulk alongside came, And the twain were casting dice,
 The game is done, I've won, I've won, Quoth she, and whistles thrice.
 The sun's rim dips, the stars rush out, At one stride comes the dark,
 With far-heard whisper o'er the sea, Off shot the spectre bark.
 We listened and looked sideways up, Fear at my heart, as at a cup
 My lifeblood seemed to sip.
 The stars were dim and thick the night, The steersman's face by his lamp gleamed white.
 From the sails the dew did drip, Till clumb over the eastern bar
 The haunted moon with one bright star, Within the nether tip.
 One after one by the star-dogged moon, Too quick for groan or sigh,
 Each turned his face with a ghastly pang, And cursed me with his eye.
 Four times fifty living men, And I heard nor sigh nor groan,
 With heavy thump, a lifeless lump, They dropped down one by one.
 The souls did from their bodies fly, They fled to bliss or woe,
 And every soul had passed me by, Like the whiz of my crossbow.
 Part the fourth
 I fear thee, ancient mariner, I fear thy skinny hand,
 And thou art long and lank and brown, As is the ribbed sea-sand.
 I fear thee and thy glittering eye, And thy skinny hand so brown.
 Fear not, fear not, thou wedding guest, This body dropped not down.
 Alone, alone, all, all alone, Alone on the wide, wide sea,
 And never a saint took pity on My soul in agony.
 The many men so beautiful, And they all dead did lie,
 And a thousand, thousand slimy things lived on, And so did I.
 I looked upon the rotting sea, And drew my eyes away,
 I looked upon the rotting deck, And there the dead men lay.
 I looked to heaven and tried to pray, But o'er ever a prayer had gushed,
 A wicked whisper came, And made my heart as dry as dust.
 I closed my lids and kept them close, And the balls like pulses beat,
 For the sky and the sea, And the sea and the sky,
 Lay like a load on my weary eye, And the dead were at my feet.
 The cold sweat melted from their limbs, Nor rot nor reek did they,
 The look with which they looked at me Had never passed away.
 An orphan's curse would drag to hell A spirit from on high,
 But oh, more horrible than that Is the curse in a dead man's eye.
 Seven days, seven nights I saw that curse, And yet I could not die.
 The moving moon went up the sky, And nowhere did abide.
 Softly she was going up, And a star or two beside.
 Her beams bemocked the sultry main, Like April, hoarfrost spread.
 But where the ship's huge shadow lay, The charmed water burnt all way,
 A still and awful red.
 Beyond the shadow of the ship, I watched the water snakes.
 They moved in tracks of shining white, And when they reared,
 The elfish light fell off in hoary flakes.
 Within the shadow of the ship, I watched their rich attire,
 Blue, glossy green, and velvet black.
 They coiled and swam, And every track was a flash of golden fire.
 Oh, happy living things!
 No tongue their beauty might declare.
 A spring of love gushed from my heart, And I blessed them unaware.
 Sure, my kind saint took pity on me, And I blessed them unaware.
 The selfsame moment I could pray, And from my neck so free,
 The albatross fell off and sank, Like lead into the sea.
